Homework 7
================

For the following exercises, use the data frame created below.

``` python
import pandas as pd
df = pd.DataFrame({"var_1": [1, 2, 1, 1], "var_2": [1, 2, 3, 4], "var_3": ["a", "a", "b", "c"]})
```

1.  Data frames and series have a method called `.isin()` that makes
    certain boolean masks easier to construct. Use `.isin()` to extract
    the rows of `df` where `var_3` is either `"a"` or `"b"`.

2.  Does there appear to be any difference between `.mean()` and
    `df.agg(mean)`? Tinker with a few applications of each to `df` and
    read the help files to formulate your answer.

3.  Write a new function called `cube_root` that takes a series and
    returns its cube root. Use that within `.agg()` to take the cube
    root of `var_2`.

4.  A very common construction is to follow a `groupby` with an
    aggregation operation. Often it’s just a single column of output
    that you’re interested in, but you can get there by selecting the
    column at the beginning of the operation or at the end. Demonstrate
    both approaches using `df` and explain which you think is preferable
    and why.

5.  When you studied numpy arrays, you learned that it makes a
    distinction between *viewing* a sub-array versus *copying* it (you
    used `.copy()`). Using `df`, determine if the same distinction
    applies with pandas data frames.

6.  Consider the four different approaches to setting the value in the
    1st row, 1st column to `2`. The final method is the preferred
    approach, but for the other three, see if you can figure out why
    you’re getting those warning messages.

<!-- end list -->

``` python
df[0:1]["var_1"] = 2
df["var_1"][0:1] = 2
df[["var_1"]][0:1] = 2
df.loc[0, "var_1"] = 2
```
