Homework 13
================

### Building a car factory in Python

Pick up where we left off in lecture with the definition of the `car`
class, with five attributes and three methods.

``` python
class car:
  """ Create a new car """
  def __init__(self, make = "honda", model = "civic", 
               year = 2007, mpg = 30, gas = 12):
    """ Create a new car with attributes """
    self.make = make
    self.model = model
    self.year = year
    self.mpg = mpg
    self.gas = gas
    
  def drive(self, distance):
    """ Drive a distance (in miles) and deplete the gas """
    self.gas = self.gas  - distance / self.mpg

  def age(self, years):
    """ Age a car by a number of years and decrease mpg """
    self.mpg += -years / 4
    
  def greet(self, name):
    """ Greet the user with car characteristics """
    print("Hello, I am a " + self.make.capitalize() + 
          " " + self.model.capitalize() + " and my name is " +
          name + ".")
```

1.  The `.age()` function is currently problematic: its possible to age
    your car into negative mpg. It also doesn’t keep track of the age
    explicitly. Modify the `.__init__` method to add an age attribute
    and modify the `.age()` method so that mpg is not a strictly
    decreasing linear function of years aged.

2.  Modify the `.drive()` method to respond more usefully if the user
    specifies the car to drive farther than is possible given the gas in
    the tank. If this happens, prevent the gas from going negative and
    print a message when the tank is empty. Be sure your method has a
    docstring.

3.  Add a `.fill()` method that can be used to fill the tank back up
    with gas. To make this realistic add an attribute for the size of
    the gas tank and print message to `.fill()` for when the tank is
    full. Be sure your method has a docstring.

4.  Right now, the notion of driving only involves the spending of gas.
    More importantly, though, it changes the location of the car. Add an
    attribute that stores the distance of the car from Cal. Modify the
    `.drive()` method to take an additional argument `to_cal` that takes
    boolean values and will affect the distance from Cal attribute. Add
    a message that prints whenever the car has returned to Cal.

### Building a car factory in R

R’s S3 approach to OOP is a bit different. The new `sloop` package has
some useful tools for understanding how it works.

5.  Use `s3_methods_generic()` to print out all of the methods that stem
    from the generic function `summary()`. Which ones have you used
    before?

6.  Use `s3_methods_class()` to print out all of the methods have been
    written for the `lm()` class. Which ones have you used before?

In lecture we created an S3 R class called “car” by writing a
*constructor* function that sets the attributes of an instance of that
object. Instead of including the methods in the definition of the class,
they’re written separately, are are associated with a *generic* version
of the function. Here, we replaced `.greet()` with `summary.car()`.

``` r
new_car <- function(make = "honda", model = "civic",
                    year = 2007, mpg = 30, gas = 12) {
  out <- list(make = make,
              model = model,
              year = year,
              mpg = mpg,
              gas = gas)
  structure(out, class = c("car", "list"))
}

summary.car <- function(obj, ...) {
  cat(paste0("Hello, I am a ", obj$make, " ", obj$model, "."))
}
```

7.  Run the above code then call the same two `sloop` functions to check
    which methods the `car` class has to check in `summary.car()` shows
    up as one of the methods for the `summary()` generic.

8.  Implement a `age.car()`, `drive.car()`, and `fill.car()` method with
    the same functionality as in Python, adding attributes to your
    constructor as necessary. Writing each of these methods actually
    requires writing two functions: a generic function, e.g. `drive()`,
    as well as the class-specific methods. These generics are very
    simple pass-through functions that serve to be sure the correct
    method is called. See <https://adv-r.hadley.nz/s3.html#s3-methods>
    to learn their structure. Note that a method must have the same
    arguments as its generic. There is one exception to this rule: if
    the generic has `...`, the method can contain a superset of the
    arguments. This allows methods to take arbitrary additional
    arguments (see:
    <https://adv-r.hadley.nz/functions.html?q=dot-dot-#fun-dot-dot-dot>).

9.  Use `sloop` to verify the methods that are available for an object
    of class `car`.

10. This exercise is to be done twice: first in R then in Python.
    Construct a car that gets 20 mpg and starts 210 miles from Cal with
    10 gallons in its gas tank. Write lines of code that describe each
    of the following:
    
      - The car drives straight back to Cal.
      - The car drives for awhile back to Cal, stops for gas, then
        continues back to Cal.
    
    Each line of Python code should be a single line using dot notation
    to pass methods. Each line of R code should be concatenate the
    methods using pipe operator `%>%`.

11. An alternative to writing R code as methods for an S3 object is to
    just write independent functions `age()`, `drive()` and `fill()`.
    What are the advantages and disadvantages of the object-oriented
    approach?
